http://www.memphis.edu/law/documents/academicadvisingpowerpointrising2ls.pdf
ACADEMIC ADVISING Rising 2Ls Dean David S. Romantz dromantz@memphis.edu Law School Curriculum First year Building blocks of American law Focus on legal analysis Second year Foundational courses Focus on broad exposure to many practice areas Third year Law practice skills Focused coursework in elective areas of interest Focus on transition to practice Graduation Requirements 2L All students must have at least 90 credit hours and at least a 2.0 GPA to graduate Second - year Course Requirement: Evidence (4 hrs ) in either F all or S pring; Fall: Prof. Frank Spring: Prof. K. Schaffzin Evidence is the only course you must take by the end of your second year of law school Graduation Requirements: 2L/3L Professional Responsibility (2 hrs ) We offer PR in both the Fall and Spring semesters Fall: Prof. Lidge Spring: Prof. Wilson You may enroll in PR whenever you wish I recommend you take PR in your 2L year PR is a prerequisite for Clinic courses Saves room in your 3L for electives Multistate Professional Responsibility Exam? State bar requirement Offered fall, spring, and summer Can take the MPRE while enrolled in PR Must take MPRE within two years of your bar exam Go to http:// www.ncbex.org/multistate - tests/mpre for more information Graduation Requirements: 2L/3L Statutory Course Menu A student must enroll in two courses in the Statutory Courses Menu to graduate analysis in important areas of commercial and tax law This menu also includes subjects tested on the Tennessee Bar exam The Menu: Commercial Paper (2 or 3 hrs ) Sales (3 hrs ) Secured Transactions (3 hrs ) Income Tax (3 or 4 hrs ) Corporate Tax (3 hrs ) Graduation Requirements: 2L/3L Practice Foundation Courses Menu A student must enroll in two courses in the Statutory Courses Menu to graduate The courses in this menu are designed to expose students to key law courses that are often the foundation of modern law practice This menu also includes subjects sometimes tested on the Tennessee Bar exam The Menu: Business Organizations (3 hrs ) hrs ) Family Law (3 hrs ) Administrative Law (3 hrs ) Criminal Procedure (3 hrs ) When to take menu courses? You will need four menu courses to graduate Two from the Practice Foundation Menu Two from the Statutory Course Menu I recommend you take as many menu courses as you can tolerate in your 2L year This strategy saves 3L year for skills courses, non - menu bar courses, and electives Allows you to explore practice options (electives and skills courses) in your final year Allows you to satisfy certificate requirements Allows you to enroll in bar courses Graduation Requirements: 2L/3L Upper - class Writing Requirement Lawyering is a communicative profession and lawyers must demonstrate proficiency in research and writing After your second semester, a student is required to complete at least one seminar course to graduate A seminar course is an intensive research and writing course that culminates in a substantial paper Most seminar courses require a scholarly paper on a student - selected legal topic Legal Argument & Appellate Practice and Brief Writing Seminar satisfy the writing requirement by research and drafting an appellate brief A student on law review may satisfy the writing requirement through the Note Graduation Requirements: 2L/3L Legal Skills Requirement A student must complete at least one skills course to graduate Skills courses are designed to teach students how to practice law Skills courses include: Clinics (eligible after 45 hours) Externships (eligible after 28 hours) Trial Advocacy (eligible after Evidence) ADR/Mediation or ADR/Negotiation Moot Court/Mock Trial Competitions Pre - trial Litigation Other approved courses ELECTIVES Beyond the graduation requirements, the law school offers a wide variety of elective courses You may take elective beginning in your second year of study Some popular elective courses are: Civil Rights Mergers & Acquisitions Criminal Procedure II Health Law Legislation International Law Fair Employment Practices Intellectual Property Trust Law National Security Law Immigration Law Insurance Law Products Liability Elder Law CHOOSING ELECTIVES What to consider: Is there a course(s) in an area of law that you intend to practice? Did you enjoy a course and want to learn more about the area? Are there courses offered that are sometimes tested on the bar, such as Remedies or Conflicts of Law? Are you curious about a practice area and want to learn more about it? Do you need exposure to or more practice in a particular lawyering skill? Have you heard that a professor or adjunct is great? CHOOSING ELECTIVES What NOT to consider: Does the class meet on Fridays? How much reading? Is the exam open - or closed - book? Does the course meet before 9 a.m.? Does the course meet after 4 p.m.? Can I use my laptop? Does the professor call on people? Do I have an outline for the course? CHOOSING ELECTIVES: Bar Courses MBE Civil Procedure Constitutional Law Contracts Criminal Law Criminal Procedure Evidence Property Torts TN Bar Exam Business Organizations Civ Pro (Federal and TN) Sales Secured Transactions Commercial Paper Conflicts of Law Constitutional Law (federal and TN) Contracts Criminal Law & Procedure Family Law Evidence Professional Responsibility Property Remedies Torts CHOOSING ELECTIVES Do you need advice? Ask me . . . I am the academic dean Ask Dean Aden Ask Jamie Johnson, Law School Registrar Ask Jacque , Law School Diversity Coordinator Ask Dean Rudolph or Chesney McAfee in the Career Services Office Ask a faculty member especially if s/he teaches in an area that you want to practice Ask a lawyer Avoid basing important course decisions on: Rumor Hallway/Facebook chatter Certificates in Law You may elect to work towards one of 5 certificate programs: Certificate in Advocacy Certificate in Business Law Certificate in Health Law Certificate in Tax Law Please review carefully the certificate requirements found on our webpage Each certificate program has core (required) courses, additional (elective) courses, non - course requirements, and GPA requirements To graduate with a certificate requires careful planning. Please see the certificate advisor with questions: Advocacy Prof. Kritchevsky Business Prof . Smith Health Prof. Campbell Tax Prof. Kratzke SUMMER 2015 Dates Classes start Monday, May 18, 2015 Classes end on Wednesday, July 6, 2015 Exams end on Friday, July 10, 2015 Courses: Sales (Smith) (3 hrs Statutory Course Menu) Criminal Procedure (Mulroy) (3 hrs Practice Foundation Menu) Externships (2 - 3 - 4 hrs ) (See Prof. D. Schaffzin) Please see law.memphis.edu for more information. Fall Registration 2015 We will publish Fall 2015 class schedules by the end of the week Please read the registration and limited - enrollment memos very carefully Priority Enrollment: 3Ls register before 2Ls Registration Dates: Registered veterans register on Monday, April 6, 2015 3Ls register on Wednesday, April 8, 2015 2Ls register on Thursday, April 9, 2015 A class may fill before you get a chance to register for it But check back often; students drop/add all summer Limited Enrollment Courses Skills and Seminars (both requirements for graduation) You rank all of the skills or seminar courses that you are willing to take If your first choice is full, you will be placed in your second (or third or fourth or fifth) choice Academic Advising Part II Monday small group sessions are mandatory Held during LM Lecture time (11 a.m. or 1 p.m.) Dean Aden posted academic advising small group Small groups sessions to allow you to ask us questions If you would like one - on - one academic counseling, please contact me, Jamie Johnson, or Dean A den