http://www.memphis.edu/processimprovement/doc/advising/advising_qhrecomm_092013.pdf
9/13/2013 For additional information on Process Improvement www.memphis.edu/processimprovement/ Page 1 : The team met to review a dvising responsibilities across campus, focusing on the effectiveness of our current advising system(s); examine various advising strategies based on existing research, with focus on effectiveness of centralized vs. decentralized models . Q UICK H IT R ECOMMENDATIONS Advisors A ssigned to Student upon A ccepted A dmissions : Completed June 2013 Director Academic Advising & Degree Planning will create and distribute report to College Advisors list of students with unassigned advisors based on major indicated upon admissions to University . Create Advisor Packet: Three weeks to implement : Completed September 2013 Form a work team to create packet with information needed for new advisors. Include Best Practices, Banner forms, Umdrive, Appointments Plus, Guidelines, etc. Include PACAA (Provo st Advisory Council on Academic Advising) on the decision making to approve what goes into the packet . Advisor Website Review : Completed September 2013 Form a work team to review content and the links . Simplify webpage for ease of use . Add f requently ask questions that list issues that impact student registration . What should be added or removed . Advising Script remove Advisor name Finalized : Completed July 2013 Finalize testing and implement the script that will remove advisor name from student record upon Graduation . Time savings in it will eliminate manual process for Advisors to review each record and remove their name . Reports will be more accurate without these records. Su Status as of June 1, 2011 9/13/2013 For additional information on Process Improvement www.memphis.edu/processimprovement/ Page 2 R ECOMMENDATIONS IN FOLLOWING ORDER : Role of All Advisors Clearly Defined (College, Department, Professional, Faculty , Peer - Students ): Director of Academic Advising and Degree Planning Resource role include : o Responsible for C oordinating information to all College Advisors and provide Professional Development College Advisor r ole defined to include: o Coordinate information for all department professional and faculty advisors . o Coordinate information and follow - up with Peer advisors . o Participate in the performance evaluation for their department advisors . Accountability identifie d for College Advisors . Required to attend two advisor meetings a year . Participate with the advisor network . Will be evaluated on your effectiveness . Faculty advisors cannot be assigned advising responsibilities until after completed one semester . Standardized Training required for all Advisors/Faculty - Advisors: Training required for anyone taking an advisor role ( College, Department , Professional, Faculty, Peer and Administrative Office staff) . Formalized face - to - face training on advising best prac tices . Director of Academic Advising and Degree Planning Resource provide standardized train ing for all advisors . Create a guideline for advising with all the required information needed . Include Banner training, access not granted until training completed . Trainer will complete Banner security access form and send to Student Security Officer to grant access . Centralized Intake for all Incoming First - time F reshmen (Academic Counseling Center) : Ensure all incoming freshmen will receive the same consistent information . First semester students would be advised in centralized center and then departmental advisors will be assigned . Provide counseling services to all incoming student and better monitoring of chosen Major path . Additional two three FTE will be needed in Academic Counseling Center to handle the additional load . Benchmarks and Communication plan to Identify S tudents who need to be directed to another Major : Generate reports for Colleges to easily identify students who may not be successful in their chosen major . Develop a communication plan to encourage students to visit Advisor in timely manner . . Campus Under - graduate S urvey of effectiven ess of Advising: 2010 vs. 2013 Develop methodology to encourage an incre ase in student responses to 10%. o Student population 17, 000+ . o 2010 survey 900 responses 2013 survey 200+ responses . o How does the University access responses with only 1% return for decision making . 9/13/2013 For additional information on Process Improvement www.memphis.edu/processimprovement/ Page 3 C hange Banner reference P re - Improve Student and Parent perceptions . Will remove student confusion how they are classified . Under Graduate Curriculum Committee and PACAA (Provost Advisory Council on Academic Advising) will need to . Additional Student Banner Data added to H : Form a work team to determine Banner fields that can be added to Hobson to improve use of the communication tool for the advisors and information to the students. Propose a Hobson Administrator to oversee and maintain communication tool: o view Team. R ECOMMENDATIONS TO CONSIDER : Ratio Student to Professional Advisor National survey states 295 - 1 (UofM average 500 - 1 for Professional advisors and 50 - 1 for Faculty Advisors ) . Use of Matrix for file sharing eliminating shadow systems and cent . ITD create Banner trigger /or workflow to e - mail advisor name has been changed on the student record. Will benefit the prior advisor the student have switched majors or advisors. New admitted students should not be assigned an advisor based on the major they entered on the ir admission application form. Advisor would be assigned during NSO . Faculty - Advisors annual evaluation updated to include section evaluating advising performance. Have to develop a model to collec t data to analyze their effectiveness.