http://www.memphis.edu/cas/advising/documents/advising_in_arts_and_sciences.pdf
THE ADVISING PROCESS IN THE COLLEGE OF ARTS AND SCIENCES In the College of Arts and Sciences, all students are advised in the department in which they have a declared major. Students are advised according to the system established by the department, mean ing that they are primarily advised either by a faculty member or a full - time advisor in that department. How do students declare a major in Arts and Sciences? Students declare a major upon admission to the Scates Hall, at which point they are referred to the appropriate person in the department of their new majors. There are basically four categories of students: 1. In - coming freshmen who do not have to complete any developmental coursework, and who are there fore able to declare a major upon matriculating. 2. Transfer students who declare a major upon admission to the university. 3. Students who are already enrolled at the university and have previously been undeclared (and advised in the Academic Advising Center), who then declare a major. 4. Students who have previously had a major in another college and who are switching to one of our majors. With the exception of resource advising for Pre - Health and Pre - Law students , no students are officially Office. members whose main responsibility is centered on assisting both students and departmental advisors with the advising process Ass ociate Dean s : the Ass ociate Dean s advise the Dean on undergraduate affairs in the college, including undergraduate curr iculum, scholarships, and grade appeals . Director of Advising office and the departmental advisors, with responsibilities including new student orientation, recruitment, overloads, late adds, late and retroactive withdrawals, early intervention, and service on university committees that focus on advising issues. Pre - Professional Advisor ( Jessica Kelso ): The Pre - professional Advisor has responsibility for resource advising for students interested in careers in the health sciences and law and for assisting these students with their application to professional school. Th e Pre - professional Advisor is responsible for programs and services that provide students with in - depth information about professional school admissions requirements. Graduation Analyst s (Mary Jones and Sylvia Nisar): the Graduation Analysts are responsibl e for checking students out for graduation, completing their summary of coursework remaining, certifying students for graduation, and working with advisors to make sure that all students complete the requirements for graduation.