http://www.memphis.edu/advising/Documents/advisor_quickquide.pdf
AD V I QUICK GUIDE The intent of this document is to provide Advisors an easy reference for using UMdegree to assist with registering students. October 2013 1 October 2013 Login to myMemphis Portal Go to: http://my.memphis.edu and log in using your UUID and password Step 1: Click on the Advising or Faculty tab if you do not see either of these tabs, contact your Dean or designee to fill out the proper access form UMdegree For detail instructions review the UMdegree Instruction Manual: http://www.memphis.edu/umdegree/pdfs/undegree_manual_18advx.pdf Step 1: Locate the UMdegree channel, click the UMdegree logo Step 2: Enter the s UID (Banner Uxxxxxxxx number) press enter or search by name by clicking on the Find icon and entering First name and Last name 2 October 2013 If the student information is not displayed, they have not been admitted or readmitted refer them to the Admissions Office. Worksheets Verification: Step 1: Click on the Worksheets tab if not automatically displayed. Click on the Process New button. This is like a refresh button that tells the program to process all new information that may need to be updated to the program. a) Program : Degree, Major, and Concentration If not correct, complete an Academic Program Maintenance Form have it signed by your college dean or representative, and send to Registrar office if your college allows you that responsibility. If not, send to your college advisor to send the form to the Registrar. **Please note: If student is an athlete, they must get CAAS permission to change their major. This is important for their eligibility requirements. b) Catalog : The Academic Year indicates the student catalog. If not correct, complete an Academic Program Maintenance Form and send to Registrar office (or to the college advisor to submit to Registrar). 3 October 2013 c) Advisor : You should be listed as the advisor of record. If not, contact the department or college personnel who assign advisors. 4 October 2013 d) Fallthrough/Elective Courses : scroll down and review the transfer courses to see if any courses can be petitioned for general education, college or major requirements. e) Worksheet or registration checklist : identify what courses are needed to complete the degree (look for courses highlighted as being still needed or listed under Petitions A) Click on the tab and complete the petition request. B) Click on the add petition tab and enter your request. Message will be delivered to a central queue to be processed. C) When the petitions have been applied, they will show as such in the petitions tab. A screenshot of an example is provided on the next page for A - C. 5 October 2013 A) B) C) 6 October 2013 Planner Review Step 1: Click on the Planner tab. Discuss with the student which courses are appropriate for the upcoming semester. a) Click on New begin to enter courses make comments as appropriate name the plan (ex: fall 2013 schedule) b) Click 7 October 2013 Advising Forms Channel Removing the PIN: The purpose of the PIN is to create a hold that will prevent the student from registering for courses until the student has met with his/her advisor. The advisor removes the PIN so that the student can register for courses in the upcoming semester. Step 1: Click on Alternate PIN (SPAAPIN) Step 2: When accessing Banner forms the following messages appear (depending on the web browser you use): Click Run this time (again, depending on browser this example is Google Chrome) 8 October 2013 Click Java security question Step 4: SPAAPIN form This is a screenshot of what you will initially see. 9 October 2013 To begin, you need to know the terms and term codes. The term code is determined by adding the current year to the semester code. Spring = 10, Summer = 50, and Fall = 80. Add those to the end of the current year to get the term code. For example, sprin g semester of term code was: 201210. A. Term Code : type in the term code for the upcoming semester/semesters that you wish to remove the pin (summer and fall can be removed at the same time), then tab over to the student ID B. Student ID : enter their Banner ID (Uxxxxxxxx) name will automatically pop up) C. Go to D. Go to and click on ( NOT E. Semester Code : Enter the semester code for which you are clearing the student, then tab over F. Process Name : e in Process name field G. Alternate Pin field : enter the College Code provided by your College Advisor, which often is the initials H. Click IMPORTANT NOT TO MISS THIS STEP Steps A, B, and C. Enter the term code, the student ID, and hit next block. 10 October 13 Step D) Be sure to remove the TREG completely, just clear the pin (otherwise it save correctly and the student will still be restricted from registering). Steps E, F, G, and H. When you hit save, the date will automatically post in the activity date.