http://www.memphis.edu/alumni/about/pdfs/annualreport2008.pdf
. . . . . . . . . . ......... . U of M Alumni Association & Alumni and Constituent Relations 2007 08 Annual Report Tammy Hedges Executive Director, Alumni Association & Director, Alumni and Constituent Relations . . . . . . . . . . 2 2007 08 Annual Report University of Memphis Alumni Associ ation & Alumni and Constituent Relations Executive Summary The University of Memphis Alumni Association , le ad by President Martin Zummach, takes pride in the continued growth of alumni participation and giving during the past five years. Participation has increased at every level and, at FY08, stands at an institutional high with increased alumni, friend and donor engagement. Organized by a more formal structure designed to support alumni and friends of the University, the U of M Alumni Association has ta field. Our identification statement says it best The University of Memp his Alumni Association : Advancing , Connecting and Engaging the University of Memphis family . True Blue Tradition very great city has a great University, and e very great University has a great Alumni Association. University President, Dr. Shirley C. Raines Spring 2004, Vision Forum Membership The University of Memphis Alumn i Association enjoys the largest membership in its history. Prior to 2003, the largest membership on record is 2440. The current number of Alumni Association members total 5018, an all time high representing a 41% increase over last year. By the number s l argest paid Alumn i Asso ciation membership in Universi ty of Memphis history by nearly 26 00 members. 3 Memb ership Growth 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 1117 members 1644 members 1871 members 2508 members 3567 members 5018 + members Through the Alumni Association and its Clubs and Chapters, up to 3 8 student scholarships and book scholarships are give n totaling over $44 ,000 . B y the number s Current membership o f the Alumni Association has increa sed by app roximately 400% since the restructure and new appointments in 2003 . B y the number s Since 2003, Association growth through Club s and Chapter s has extended from 13 to 61 areas of participation and engagement . . . . . . . . . . . 4 ALUMNI GIVING PERCENTAGE FY03 FY04 FY05 FY06 FY07 FY08 2.40% 3.90% 5.20% 5.60% 6.50% 7.00% Notable Association Event s Young Alumni 5K hel d on campus - attendance 300 + runners. Distinguished Alumni Awards coordi nated to include a pre - event reception at the location of the new law school attendance 750 + . During the NCAA Basketball Tournament, the A lumni Association hosted over 120 watch parties and tournament activities to include national coverage by CNN and r egional coverage by each local television station and print medium. attendance 5000 + at Championship Game Pep Rally. The Homecoming parade route w as changed to give alumni and friends a better vie w of campus 3500+ participants. T ravel and events surrou nding all football games and bowl activities. Targeting the Jackson, Tennessee area, Boots, Brims & BBQ was an event sponsored by the Alumni Association and the Office of Government Relations with the involvement of athletics and recruitment 250 + guests. For the first time, the Alumni Association was invited to participate in the Spring Tiger Tour held at Nashville, Jackson, Southaven and Memphis. A highly successful pre - game event was held in Nashville before th e Memphis basketball game. Attendance wa s 600+ . The Nursing Alumni Chapter held its first outstanding alumni luncheon with over 100 guests. Family Weekend sponsored by the Parents Club was re - instated as a University tradition. The first held in nearly ten years. Nashville Golf Tournament raise d funds for scholarships - 150+ guests. Houston and Dallas Clubs joined forces to create the Texas Tigers Scholarship Fund. Official University of Memphis class ring design and inauguration events. 5 Awards and Acknowledgements The University o f Memphis Alumni Association has been awarded several distinctions this past year. Among those distinctions: Gold Award in the Special Publication category given by the College Public Relations Association for the 2008 Distinguished Alumni Awards invitati on. Award of Excellence for Special Events fro m CASE District III for the 2007 Di A ward of Excellence for Constituency Organizations Programs from CASE District III involving Athletics and Recruitment. Special Merit Award in Design for Print from CASE District III for the 2007 Distinguished Alumni Awards Invitation Special Merit Award in CD - ROM and other Electronic Communications from CASE District III for the 2007 - featuring highlights of the University and Association. Acknowledgement of alumni and friends is an important component of the Associ ation. This year, it was our honor to acknowledge the efforts and talents of the following alumni and friends: University of Memphis Alumni Association Distinguished Alumni Awards : o Distinguished Alumni Douglas Edwards , Cathy Ross , W illiam Sanderson o Distinguished Friend Larry Papasan o Outstanding Young Alumni Johanna Edwards o J. Millard Smith Illustrious Service to the Association Bruce Harber U of M Alumni Association True Blue Tradition Award g ratefully acknowledging our dear alumnus and friend, Thomas Boggs U of M Alumni Association Parents of the Year Bruce and Amy Hagan U of M Alumni Association Outstanding Out of Town Club/Chapter Nashville Alumni Club; President, Mike Dodd 1) U of M Alumni Association Outstanding Affinity Club/Chapter Band Alumni Chapter; President, Jeremy Stinson 322 + Events held by the Association Clubs and Chapters 313 Club, Chapter, Committee and Association Meetings . . . . . . . . . . 6 U of M Alumni Association Outstanding Academic Club/Chapter Law Alumni Chapter; President, Gary Smith U of M Alumni Ass ociation Faculty and Staff Awards o Distinguished Research, Excellence in Engaged Scholarship and Creative Achievement r ecipients include: Stephen W. Hancock (MFA) for achievement in the Creative Arts ; James E. Fickle (Ph.D.) for the Humanities ; William T. S mith (Ph.D.) for the Social Sciences and Business; George A. Anastassiou (Ph.D.) for the Sciences, Engineering and Math ; Michael Schmidt (MGD) for Excellence in Engaged Scholarship o Distinguished Teaching Award recipients include:Lily Ashfar (D.M.) Prof. of Music ; I rvin L. Tankersley (J.D) - Assoc. Prof. of Accountancy ; Fernando Burgos Perez (Ph.D.) Prof. of Foreign Languages and Literatures ; Yuki Matsuda - Assoc. Prof. of Foreign Languages and Literatures ; Robert R. Marchini - Prof. of Physics o Distinguished Ad visor Awards - Lisa Eldin, Nancy Magallanes Loewenberg School of Nursing o Distinguished Alumni - and Betty College of Arts & Sciences o Distinguished Alumni - and P o Outstanding Friends - Wallace and Olivia Bruce Department of Journalism o Distinguished Alumni - , and Fogelman College of Business and Economics o Distinguished Alumni - Eri and Herff College of Engineering o Distinguished Alumni - o Outstanding Faculty - o Outstanding Faculty Teaching Award - Stephanie Ive o Outstanding Faculty Research Award - Gary Qi o Distinguished Service in Engineering Award - Ring Cecil C. Humphreys School of Law o Pillars of Excellence: Irvin Bogatin, James D. Causey, Hon. W. Fra nk Frances G. Loring, James M. Manire, Thomas R. Prewitt, Sr. , S. Shepard Tate, Wellford o Excellence in Teaching Eugene Shapiro University College o o Closing Comments There are several areas of concentration where work is needed in order to continue advancing the Association. Though the better development of these areas, the Alumni Association as a whole will advance. Goals for the 08 - 09 academic year include: 7 Continue building membership to reach 2012 goal of 10,000 members. Adopt e - community for alumni during fall 2008. Create more communication mediums for alumni and friends. Build affinity revenues. Implementation of Tigers Around Town sponsored by the University of Memphis Alumni Association in anticipation of the 2012 University Centennial Cel ebration. As an As sociation, we confront market unc ertainties: however, o ur overarching go als, will remain the same. We will continue to focus on membership growth, the strengthening of the Association through focus on clubs and chapters and the expansion of communication with our alumni and friends.