http://www.memphis.edu/lead/pdfs/annual-review-of-student-program-achievement.pdf
HIAD Policy Annual Review of Student Program and Achievement PROBLEM: Students are often unaware of their progress and standing in their HIAD program. Without regular communication from the program, they may fall behind in their coursework, receive too many incompletes, o r perform poorly in coursework thereby earning poor grades. POLICY: At the end of every academic year, the faculty will assess the progress and achievement of each HIAD student. The student will be notified as to their status and directions for the following semester(s). PROCESS: At the final academic year HIAD faculty meeting, the faculty will convene as the HIAD Retention Committee. E ach advisor will prepare a list of advisees, grouped into three categories wit h criteria specified as follows. students with one Incomplete or C/D/F grade. inco mplete or C/D/F grades. HIAD faculty will make final recommendations to advisors. Advisors will be responsible for 1) notifying their advisees, 2) indicating the actions the student must take (remove incomplete, reenroll in a course to raise the grade earned, or other action) by a certain date, and 3) placing the Students who do not make improvements by the date given in the notification or the end of the following academic year may be dismissed. Students who are experiencing life challenges need to notify their advisors so that these conditions may be taken into consideration when faculty meet to discuss whether dismissal from the progra m is indicated . The decision to recommend a student for dismissal is not final until the department chair and associate dean for graduate studies have reviewed and approved the action. Students may appe al the decision by following this procedure: http://www.memphis.edu/gradcatalog/retentionappeals.php TIMING: For Fall 2014, the 12 - credit review policy will continue to be in effect. However, beginning Spring 20 15, the 12 - credit review policy will no longer be utilized by the HIAD program and this Annual Review policy will be in effect. Reviewed: 4/17/14 Adopted: 4/17/14