http://anthropology.memphis.edu/kedia.html





  
































 
		 var _gaq = _gaq || [];
  		_gaq.push(['_setAccount', 'UA-3338257-2']);
  		_gaq.push(['_trackPageview']);

		  (function() {
			var ga = document.createElement('script'); ga.type = 'text/javascript'; ga.async = true;
			ga.src = ('https:' == document.location.protocol ? 'https://ssl' : 'http://www') + '.google-analytics.com/ga.js';
			var s = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(ga, s);
		  })();
		
		function taglink(category, action, label) {
            _gaq.push(['_trackEvent', category, action, label]);
            console.log('Tracked Event ' + category + ', ' + action + ', ' + label);
        }


window.jQuery || document.write('<script src="js/vendor/jquery-1.11.2.min.js"><\/script>')





Department of Anthropology - 
      	Department of Anthropology
      	 - University of Memphis
   











            (function(global) {
                if (typeof TTDUniversalPixelApi === 'function') {
                    var universalPixelApi = new TTDUniversalPixelApi();
                    universalPixelApi.init("xwqkvoc", ["h3b0hyf"], "https://insight.adsrvr.org/track/up", "ttdUniversalPixelTag864d96767ed04dce8b93b207a9536774");
                }
            })(this);
        






















Lambuth Campus
myMemphis
Webmail
Faculty & Staff
Contact
Directories



Search











Academics 

Welcome
Colleges & Schools
Undergraduate Catalog
Graduate Catalog
Honors Program


Admissions 

Welcome
Undergraduate Students
Graduate Students
Law Students
International Students


Athletics 

Welcome
Ticket Information
Intramurals
Rec Center
gotigersgo.com


Research 

Welcome
Research Resources
Centers/Chairs of Excellence
Centers and Institutes
Research Portal
Office of Institutional Research


Support UofM 

Welcome
Make a Gift
Alumni Association
Year of Service


Libraries 

Welcome
Resources
Services
Special Collections
Ask a Librarian











Resources for...

Prospective Students
Current and Returning Students
Parents
Alumni
Veterans

Expand Menu






Learn About the Admissions Process 
Learn how to apply for admission to the UofM.


Schedule a Visit 
Tours offered weekdays at 9:30 am & 1:30 pm.


True Blue Tiger 
We want YOU to be a Tiger.


Scholarships and Financial Aid 
Apply for assistance and academic scholarships.




Undergraduate Applications 
Spring Deadline: Dec 15
Get an early start on your application.


Graduate Applications 

Step Up: Start a Masters or PhD today.


Law Applications 
Fall 2016 Deadline: Mar 16
Experience Memphis Law.


International Applications 
Spring Deadline: Dec 15
Receive a world-class education.

















"Most proud of my accomplishment of graduating with a degree in accounting in three years with Summa Cum Laude and Honors."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)










Registration 
Register for classes or edit your schedule.


Student Services 
Experience college life beyond the classroom.


Student Organizations 
Get engaged. Get involved. Experience more.


Majors and Minors 
Find your calling with over 50 degree programs.




Course Schedule 
View class offerings for the current and upcoming terms.


Academic Calendars 
Mark your calendar for start days, breaks and final exams.


Academic Support Services 
Improve your academic success.


Lambuth Campus 
Advancing the University's mission in West Tennessee.

















"Most proud of my accomplishment of graduating with a degree in accounting in three years with Summa Cum Laude and Honors."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)










eNews and Signup 
Stay up-to-date with the UofM.


Parent and Family Events 
Join us for events held just for you!


FAQs 
Have a question? We have answers!


Connect With Us 
We are here to help you help your student.




Scholarships & Financial Aid 
We can help your student attend the UofM.


Student Services 
Resources to help your student succeed.


Campus Card 
Add money to your student's card for books and food.


Give to UofM 
Your gift to the Parent Fund makes the UofM a better place.




 










"Being the first one in my family to attend college."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)










Join Now 
Be True Blue and join the Alumni Association.


Update Your Information 
Receive University updates and the Memphis magazine.


Clubs and Chapters 
Get involved and stay connected to the UofM.


Make a Gift 
Your contribution can make a difference.




Lambuth Chapter 
Lambuth Graduates: Reconnect with fellow alumni.


Upcoming Events 
Mark your calendar for these upcoming events.


Photo Gallery 
View annual collections of the Alumni Association Photo Gallery.


News 
Stay up-to-date with Memphis Matters.

















"Continue to positively impact American education so every student recieves optimal teaching and learning, every day."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)













Veterans Resource Center 
Supporting the transition from military life to civilian life.


Veterans Benefits and Certifications 
Learn about Veterans Educational Benefits and Certifications.


Get Credits Toward your Degree 
Receive college credit for military experience, skills, and training.


Online Degree Programs 
Top provider of more than 50 online degree programs.










See his story: Vietnam veteran Michael Sasseen completed his degree by earning Experiential Learning Credit (ELC) from his past experiences authoring a book and working with war veterans with PTSD.
                                          
























                           			Department of Anthropology
                           	











About
Undergraduate
Graduate
People
Student Life
Resources










Home

                           	Department of Anthropology
                           	
                        


























Anthropology: studying people and culture; applying knowledge to real world issues.
Anthropology is the study of humankind. Anthropologists explore the culture, evolution,
                        behavior, beliefs and social organization of peoples around the world in prehistoric,
                        historic, and contemporary contexts. The discipline offers a comparative understanding
                        of lifeways around the planet and seeks strategies for improving quality of life in
                        a global context.
                     
The University of Memphis offers two Anthropology degrees:
Students pursuing a Bachelor of Arts in Anthropology have the opportunity for training in three of the four subfields: cultural and biological
                        anthropology, and archaeology. Students can also take advantage of numerous opportunities
                        for enriched learning such as internships, service-learning, and study abroad. Students with diverse interests
                        will find anthropology to be a stimulating major or minor, with relevance for understanding
                        pressing real world issues. In our last Senior Exit Survey students were 100% satisfied
                        with the accessibility of faculty and 94% satisfied with the quality of teaching.
                     
Students pursuing a Master of Arts in Anthropology join a nationally-recognized applied program. Students benefit from opportunities
                        to work directly with local organizations, and gain experience in community development,
                        environmental justice and sustainability, cultural identity and heritage, health disparities,
                        healthcare systems, health risk and business anthropology. The networks, knowledge,
                        and experience students build is invaluable for future employment. In a 2014 survey,
                        90% of alumni from the MA program reported that they were satisfied with the quality
                        of their education, and over 84% say their MA plays a significant role in their overall
                        career satisfaction.
                     










Undergrads: 
Declare Anthropology your major!


Join the Graduate Program
Learn about applied and engaged anthropology!


News and Events
Find out what's happening in the Department of Anthropology


Contact Us
Main office location and numbers, undergraduate and graduate advising




Follow Us Online

YouTube
Google+

 


















Full sitemap 




Admissions


Prospective Students
Undergraduate
Graduate
Law School
International
Parents
Scholarship & Financial Aid
Tuition & Fee Payment
FAQs
About UofM




Academics


Provost's Office
Libraries
Transcripts
Undergraduate Catalog
Graduate Catalog
Academic Calendar
Course Schedule
Financial Aid
Graduation
Honors Program
eCourseware




Athletics


Gotigersgo.com
Ticket Information
Intramural Sports
Recreation Center
Athletic Academic Support
Recruits
Former Tigers
Facilities
Tiger Scholarship Fund
Media





Research


Sponsored Programs
Research Resources
Centers & Institutes
Chairs of Excellence
FedEx Institute of Technology
Libraries
Grants Accounting
Environmental Health
Office of Institutional Research




Support UofM


Make a Gift
Alumni Association
Year of Service




Administrative Support


President's Office
Academic Affairs
Business & Finance
Career Opportunities
Conference & Event Services
Development Office
Government Relations
Information Technology Services
Media and Marketing
Student Affairs























Follow UofM Online
Facebook Twitter YouTube


Instagram Pinterest LinkedIn




                      
                  


















Text Only
Print
Got a Question? Ask TOM
Copyright 2015 University of Memphis
Important Notice



Last Updated: 10/27/15



University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152
Phone: 901.678.2000

The University of Memphis does not discriminate against students, employees, or applicants for admission or employment on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, disability, age, status as a protected veteran, genetic information, or any other legally protected class with respect to all employment, programs and activities sponsored by the University of Memphis. The following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding non-discrimination policies: Latosha Dexter, Interim Director for Institutional Equity.  For more information see University of Memphis Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action.

 


















