http://apcs.memphis.edu





  
































 
		 var _gaq = _gaq || [];
  		_gaq.push(['_setAccount', 'UA-3338257-2']);
  		_gaq.push(['_trackPageview']);

		  (function() {
			var ga = document.createElement('script'); ga.type = 'text/javascript'; ga.async = true;
			ga.src = ('https:' == document.location.protocol ? 'https://ssl' : 'http://www') + '.google-analytics.com/ga.js';
			var s = document.getElementsByTagName('script')[0]; s.parentNode.insertBefore(ga, s);
		  })();
		
		function taglink(category, action, label) {
            _gaq.push(['_trackEvent', category, action, label]);
            console.log('Tracked Event ' + category + ', ' + action + ', ' + label);
        }


window.jQuery || document.write('<script src="js/vendor/jquery-1.11.2.min.js"><\/script>')





Computer Science - 
      	Computer Science
      	 - University of Memphis
   











            (function(global) {
                if (typeof TTDUniversalPixelApi === 'function') {
                    var universalPixelApi = new TTDUniversalPixelApi();
                    universalPixelApi.init("xwqkvoc", ["h3b0hyf"], "https://insight.adsrvr.org/track/up", "ttdUniversalPixelTag864d96767ed04dce8b93b207a9536774");
                }
            })(this);
        






















Lambuth Campus
myMemphis
Webmail
Faculty & Staff
Contact
Directories



Search











Academics 

Welcome
Colleges & Schools
Undergraduate Catalog
Graduate Catalog
Honors Program


Admissions 

Welcome
Undergraduate Students
Graduate Students
Law Students
International Students


Athletics 

Welcome
Ticket Information
Intramurals
Rec Center
gotigersgo.com


Research 

Welcome
Research Resources
Centers/Chairs of Excellence
Centers and Institutes
Research Portal
Office of Institutional Research


Support UofM 

Welcome
Make a Gift
Alumni Association
Year of Service


Libraries 

Welcome
Resources
Services
Special Collections
Ask a Librarian











Resources for...

Prospective Students
Current and Returning Students
Parents
Alumni
Veterans

Expand Menu






Learn About the Admissions Process 
Learn how to apply for admission to the UofM.


Schedule a Visit 
Tours offered weekdays at 9:30 am & 1:30 pm.


True Blue Tiger 
We want YOU to be a Tiger.


Scholarships and Financial Aid 
Apply for assistance and academic scholarships.




Undergraduate Applications 
Spring Deadline: Dec 15
Get an early start on your application.


Graduate Applications 

Step Up: Start a Masters or PhD today.


Law Applications 
Fall 2016 Deadline: Mar 16
Experience Memphis Law.


International Applications 
Spring Deadline: Dec 15
Receive a world-class education.

















"Being the first one in my family to attend college."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)










Registration 
Register for classes or edit your schedule.


Student Services 
Experience college life beyond the classroom.


Student Organizations 
Get engaged. Get involved. Experience more.


Majors and Minors 
Find your calling with over 50 degree programs.




Course Schedule 
View class offerings for the current and upcoming terms.


Academic Calendars 
Mark your calendar for start days, breaks and final exams.


Academic Support Services 
Improve your academic success.


Lambuth Campus 
Advancing the University's mission in West Tennessee.

















"Continue to positively impact American education so every student recieves optimal teaching and learning, every day."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)













eNews and Signup 
Stay up-to-date with the UofM.


Parent and Family Events 
Join us for events held just for you!


FAQs 
Have a question? We have answers!


Connect With Us 
We are here to help you help your student.




Scholarships & Financial Aid 
We can help your student attend the UofM.


Student Services 
Resources to help your student succeed.


Campus Card 
Add money to your student's card for books and food.


Give to UofM 
Your gift to the Parent Fund makes the UofM a better place.




 










"Being the first one in my family to attend college."
READ MORE (fa fa-angle-right)










Join Now 
Be True Blue and join the Alumni Association.


Update Your Information 
Receive University updates and the Memphis magazine.


Clubs and Chapters 
Get involved and stay connected to the UofM.


Make a Gift 
Your contribution can make a difference.




Lambuth Chapter 
Lambuth Graduates: Reconnect with fellow alumni.


Upcoming Events 
Mark your calendar for these upcoming events.


Photo Gallery 
View annual collections of the Alumni Association Photo Gallery.


News 
Stay up-to-date with Memphis Matters.

















"To work with a non-profit organization that will allow me to utilize my servant leadership skills and caring ability to further enhance the socioeconomic needs of both domestic and foreign citizens."
READ MORE  (fa fa-angle-right)










Veterans Resource Center 
Supporting the transition from military life to civilian life.


Veterans Benefits and Certifications 
Learn about Veterans Educational Benefits and Certifications.


Get Credits Toward your Degree 
Receive college credit for military experience, skills, and training.


Online Degree Programs 
Top provider of more than 50 online degree programs.










See his story: Vietnam veteran Michael Sasseen completed his degree by earning Experiential Learning Credit (ELC) from his past experiences authoring a book and working with war veterans with PTSD.
                                          
























                           			Department of Computer Science
                           	











About
Future Students
Current Students
Research
People
Contact
Hiring










Home

                           	Computer Science
                           	
                        























Assistant/Associate Professor Positions AvailableThe Department is seeking candidates for multiple Assistant/Associate Professor positions
                        beginning Fall 2016, pending availability of funds.
                     

Events




T H U R SDec. 3
                                    

 
Graduation Pizza Party11:30 am-1:00 pm, Dunn Hall 336
                                 


 
 
 



W E DDec. 9
                                    

 
CS Faculty Meeting9:00-10:30 am, Dunn Hall 375
                                 


 
 
 



T H U R SDec. 10
                                    

 
Reception for Newly Admitted Freshmen5:00-6:00 pm, UC 304 (Bluff Room)
                                 


 
 
 



F R IDec. 11
                                    

 
CS Open House9:00 am-2:00 pm, venue TBA
                                 


 
 
 



S A TDec. 12
                                    

 
100 Girls of Code Workshop9:00 am-1:00 pm, Manning Hall 430/432
                                 


 
 
 



S A TDec. 12
                                    

 
Hour of Code9:30-11:00 am, Dunn Hall 118
                                 


 
 
 



See more events

Department News
CfIA Receives Cyber Security Training Grant from FEMA The Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) has awarded a 2015 Continuing Training
                        Grant of $3 million for cyber security training to the National Cybersecurity Preparedness
                        Consortium (NCPC). The project will be led by the University of Arkansas Criminal
                        Justice Institute; the University of Memphis Center for Information Assurance (CfIA)
                        will collaborate on the project as a core member of the consortium.
                     
Student Team Wins 2nd Place at Cyber Defense Competition A team of four Computer Science students recently won second place in the prestigious
                        CANSec Cyber Defense Competition, held in Little Rock on Oct. 24.
                     
Undergraduates Win NSBE HackathonUndergraduate students Herve Aniglo and Kareem Dasilva received 1st place in the first
                        annual hackathon at the National Society of Black Engineers Region 3 Fall Regional
                        Conference.
                     
CS Alumnus Tim Whitehorn to Speak at Entrepreneurs Lunch Tim Whitehorn, an alumnus of the Department's undergraduate program, will speak at
                        the Crews Center for Entrepreneurship's lunch on Wed., Oct. 28.
                     
CS Names in the NewsProf. Santosh Kumar and alumnus Dr. Sidney D'Mello were recently featured in online
                        news articles.
                     
mHealth Lab Has Three Papers Accepted at UbiCompThe Mobile Health Systems Lab has had three full papers accepted to this year's prestigious
                        ACM UbiComp conference.
                     
See more news










News & Events
Weekly colloquium talks and other events


Career Opportunities
Internship information and job postings for students


Degree Programs
Information on our degree and certificate programs


Courses
Recent syllabi for our courses


 


















Full sitemap 




Admissions


Prospective Students
Undergraduate
Graduate
Law School
International
Parents
Scholarship & Financial Aid
Tuition & Fee Payment
FAQs
About UofM




Academics


Provost's Office
Libraries
Transcripts
Undergraduate Catalog
Graduate Catalog
Academic Calendar
Course Schedule
Financial Aid
Graduation
Honors Program
eCourseware




Athletics


Gotigersgo.com
Ticket Information
Intramural Sports
Recreation Center
Athletic Academic Support
Recruits
Former Tigers
Facilities
Tiger Scholarship Fund
Media





Research


Sponsored Programs
Research Resources
Centers & Institutes
Chairs of Excellence
FedEx Institute of Technology
Libraries
Grants Accounting
Environmental Health
Office of Institutional Research




Support UofM


Make a Gift
Alumni Association
Year of Service




Administrative Support


President's Office
Academic Affairs
Business & Finance
Career Opportunities
Conference & Event Services
Development Office
Government Relations
Information Technology Services
Media and Marketing
Student Affairs























Follow UofM Online
Facebook Twitter YouTube


Instagram Pinterest LinkedIn




                      
                  


















Text Only
Print
Got a Question? Ask TOM
Copyright 2015 University of Memphis
Important Notice



Last Updated: 11/25/15



University of Memphis
Memphis, TN 38152
Phone: 901.678.2000

The University of Memphis does not discriminate against students, employees, or applicants for admission or employment on the basis of race, color, religion, creed, national origin, sex, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, disability, age, status as a protected veteran, genetic information, or any other legally protected class with respect to all employment, programs and activities sponsored by the University of Memphis. The following person has been designated to handle inquiries regarding non-discrimination policies: Latosha Dexter, Interim Director for Institutional Equity.  For more information see University of Memphis Equal Opportunity and Affirmative Action.

 


















