http://www.memphis.edu/biology/graduate/pdfs/appguide2014f.pdf
Application Guidelines Œ Graduate Program Department of Biological Sciences The University of Memphis Memphis, TN 38152 (http://www.memphis.edu/biology/ ) We are pleased that you are interested in applying for admission to the graduate program in the Department of Biological Sciences. Admission to our graduate programs is competitive and students are selected on the basis of their academic preparation, ability, performance on standardized tests, and program fit. Admission is a two -step process in which all applicants must apply to both the Graduate School and the Department of Biological Sciences. The application process is outlined below: 1. Applications should be sent to both The University of Memphis Grad uate Admissions and the Department of Biological Sciences. A. Graduate School application (submitted online) (http://www.memphis.edu/gradschool/admproc.php ) B. Department of Biological Sciences appl ication (submitted online) (http://www.memphis.edu/biology/grad/biological_sciences_graduate_program_appli cation.php ) C. Note: the Department of Biologic al Sciences deadlines are considerably earlier than those of the Graduate School . The Department of Biological Sciences prefers that students begin in the fall; however, students may be accepted for the spring term. It is essential that applicants apply in a timely manner to both the Department of Biological Sciences and the Graduate School to assure that your complete application reach the Department by the dates given below. Incomplete applications or applications received after these deadlines will no t be considered for admission. Acceptance by the Graduate School does not guarantee acceptance into the Department of Biological Sciences™ graduate program . Department of Biological Sciences Graduate Application Deadlines Fall Semester February 1 Graduate Assistantships (GA) applications are reviewed and assistantships are awarded. Fall Semester June 15 No departmental funding (GA) for applicants after Feb 1 Spring Semester September 15 Generally, GA™s will NOT be available to students applying for spring admission, although they may apply for a GA in subsequent terms. 1 2. Application to Graduate School Œ All applicants must submit the following material directly to the Office of Graduate Admissions, The University of Memphis, Wilder Tower 200, Memphis, TN 38152 ( http://www.memphis.edu/gradschool/admproc.php ). A. Electronic graduate application Œ https://ba nssbprod.memphis.edu/pls/PROD/bwskalog.P_DispLoginNon B. Non -refundable application fee ($35 for domestic applicants; $60 for international applicants) C. Official Transcripts from all colleges / universities that you have attended D. Graduate Record Examination Œ The General Graduate Record Exam (GRE) is required and scores for the Verbal, Quantitative, and Analytical Writing sections are important factors in the admission process. GRE scores must be official and reported directly by the Educational Testing Ser vice (ETS) to Graduate Admissions. Scores must be no more than five years old. The University of Memphis institution code for reporting GRE scores is 1459. E. International students must also supply the following materials to Graduate Admissions: 1) TOEFL : Acceptable minimums are 550 for paper -based (PBT) and 79 for internet -based (iBT) tests (http://www.memphis.edu/gradschool/gradpr.php ). Exam results must be no more than two years old. The inst itution code for reporting TOEFL scores is 1459. Graduate Admissions will accept scores on the International English Language Testing System (IELTS) in lieu of the TOEFL. The minimum acceptable IELTS score is 7. 2) Applicants whose highest degree is from a foreign university must have their college / university transcripts evaluated by a credentialing agency. A course -by-course evaluation report is required. The university will accept evaluations done by any credentialing agency listed on the National Ass ociation of Credential Evaluation Services web site ( http://www.naces.org ). 3) Health Certificate : Within 30 days from the first day of classes, each international student admitted to graduate school must submit a certi ficate from a licensed U.S. physician or other qualified U.S. medical authority verifying freedom from tuberculosis. 4) Health Insurance : All international students admitted to graduate school must purchase health insurance before they are allowed to enroll. 5) International applicants should file complete application credentials at least four months before the beginning of the semester for which enrollment is sought. 2 3. Application to Department of Biological Sciences Œ All applicants must submit the following materials directly to the Coordinator of Graduate Studies, Department of Biological Sciences. A. Department of Biological Sciences appl ication (submitted online) (http://www.memphis.edu/biology/grad/biological_sciences_graduate_program_appli cation.php ). Please note that within the application is a request for a personal statement. Your personal statement should address your reasons for applying to the Department of Biological Sciences ™ graduate program, and should include the following: (1) r elevant personal experience; (2) previous research experience; (3) current research interests; (4) identification of potential advisors with an explanation of how your interests are compatible with theirs; and (5) career goals. B. Curriculum Vitae (CV) Œ Your CV should include any honors, awards, publications, and relevant educational or research / posi tions. C. Prospective Advisor (Major Pr ofessor) Œ No applicant will be admitted to our graduate program without a commitment from one of our graduate faculty to serve as the advisor (major professor). Therefore, we advise you to become familiar with the research of faculty members in the Dep artment whose interests match your own (http:/ /www.memphis.edu/bio logy/contact.htm#biology_faculty ). Prior to applying for admission to the graduate program, contact the appropriate faculty member(s) and ask them to send the Graduate Coordinator a letter confirming that they will serve as your advisor. Without a sponsoring major professor, an application will NOT be considered. D. Two Letters of Recommendation Œ Two letters of r ecommendation from people qualified to evaluate your academic and professional qualifications are required. You should solicit recommendations from individuals who are familiar with your academic achievements and who can address your potential for success . E. Graduate Assistantship Œ To be considered for a Graduate Assistantship, you must complete the application process for fall admission by February 1st. Departmental graduate assistantships include a stipend and payment of tuition and fe es. Assistantships are awarded on a competitive basis, and there is no guarantee that all admitted students will receive an assistantship. International applications for Graduate Assistantships must obtain a score of 26 or higher on the spoken English component of the TOEFL internet -based test (TOEFL iBT) in order to be considered for a graduate assistantship. A majority of our graduate assistantships involve instructing undergraduate laboratory courses. 4. Your application will not be considered complete until all items have been received by Graduate Admissions and the Department of Biological Sci ences. 5. Additional information is available on the following web sites: 3 A. Department of Biological Sciences ( http://www.memphis.edu/biology/ ) B. University of Memphis Graduate School ( http://www.memphis.edu/gradschool/ ) 4