http://www.memphis.edu/socialwork/newsletters/april15newsletter.pdf
Monthly Newsletter University of Memphis Department of Social Work Greetings! If you win an award, start a study, want to promote a community event for social workers or other individuals, or anything else you feel is relevant, please send the information to Dr. Susan Elswick at selswick@memphis.edu . Thank you! Catherine Clubb - Brown, Newsletter Manager Spotlights Page 2 Upcoming events Page 3 Learn about upcoming events for social workers in our community Volunteer Page 4 - 5 Learn about upcoming volunteer opportunities at the Crisis Center April 2015 Read about the accomplishments of our social work faculty and students 2 The University of Memphis Department of Social Work April 2015 Faculty and Student Spotlight s Dr s . R o bbin Lennon - Dearing and Elena Delavega Congratulations to our own Professors Dr. Lennon - Dearing and Delageva on the upcoming publication of their article Differences in Housing, Health, and Well - Being among HIV - P ositive Women Living in Poverty in Volume 30 , edition 3 by publish ers Taylor & Francis . NO MORE Injustice! Current full - time f oundation year students recently took part in the NO MORE campaign, in participation with the counseling center at the University Memphis. These social work students demand no more injus tice! Pictured are Sarah Newman, Lauren Reed, Gerald Richardson, Chelsea Heard , Darnet t a Ware, Artice Carter, Jessica Seebeck, Catherine Clubb - Brown, Victoria Maher, DeAvila Bennett, Takindra Worles, and Thomas Gr a ham. Professor Morrow recently hosted a conference at the Universi ty of Memphis Lambuth Campus. Health profes sionals from across West Tennessee came together to share resourcefs and discuss mental health i ssues facing rural communities, including suicide and attention disorders. The conference was co vered by a reporter at the Jackson Sun. Read more here: http://www.jacksonsun.com/story/news/20 15/03/20/suicide - hits - home - west - tennessee/ 25117707/ Prof. Veronica Morrow 3 The University of Memphis Department of Social Work April 2015 Upcoming events Graduating S ocial W ork Students The West Branch of NASW Tennessee would like to welcome you to the profession of Social Work! You are invited to a Mentor Dinner for MSW & BSW Students Wednesday Ma y 6, 201 5 at 3473 Poplar Ave. Memphis, TN 38111 (901 - 324 - 3181 ) at 6:00pm Meet one - on - one with practicing social workers in the community to get career advice, support and encourageme nt as you begin your professional career! If you would like to participate in the 201 5 Mentor Dinner please apply at this link prior to April 25, 2015 : https://memphis.co1.qualtrics.com/SE/?SID=SV_78KYMSXqKTiauTr If you have questions regarding the Mentor Dinner contact Robin Lennon - Dearing at rlnnndrn@memphis.edu The University of Memphis Department of Social Work April 2015 Upcoming events Memphis Crisis Center needs Volunteers The Memphis Crisis Center will hold its next New Volunteer Training this month. They need volunteers and interns to staff their crisis lines. This is a great opportunity to gain experience, build skills, build your resume, and secure reference s and recommendation letters. New Volunteer Training ( Parts One and Two ): WHEN: Monday & Tuesday March 23rd & 24th 6:00pm - 9:00pm WHERE: MCC Trai ning Facility, 70 North Pauline (Next to Len All Train ing Materials Provided. Dinner will NOT be provided. These sessions represent parts one and two of the clas sroom portion of the training. There are a total of 4 classroom sessio ns offered on a monthly basis (Parts 3 & 4 will be March 30th & 31st) . We strongly encourage you t o take the sessions in order. Parking is available directly in front of the facility (ignore the tow - away signs). If these spaces are filled, please use the parking ga rage directly behind the facility. Parking coupons will be available at the training. Please RSVP to mike.labonte@crisis7.org < mailto:m ike.labonte@crisis7.org if you plan on attending the upcoming classroom sessions. If you have any questions about volunteering or interning call Mike LaBonte at (901) 351 - 9986. Job Postings Are you a new graduate seeking employment? Looking for new job within the social work field? current job postings when you visit the Career Center for the Department of Social Work. Tons of great information is just a click away! Visit the Career Center fo r the Department of Social Work today at http://deptofswrkuofmemphis.wordpress.com/ Students Helping Students Drs. Barnes, Elswick, Lennon - Dearing, and Washington have received a TBR grant to fund Students Helping Students. Students Helping Stu dents pairs undergraduate social work students with graduate social work students. If you are interested in improving your academic skills, we invite you to be screened for this new program. The initial assessment takes approximately one hour. You will b e assessed on your study skills, writing skills, reading fluency, stress level, and coping skills. For a screening appointment call (901) 678 - 1748 or email studentshelpingstudents@memphis.edu . Upcoming events The University of Memphis Social Work Department April 2015 Second Year Field Internships Field Internship preparation! Complete the following form by noting your top three preferences for field placement next year. Completing this form does not mean that you are guaranteed your preferred agency, but all requests will be reviewed and your placement will be based on the MSW Field accept the student. Reference the online directory (found on our website under field placement, click on directory) to identify agencies you ar e interested in. Online form: https://memphis.co1.qualtrics.com/SE/?S ID=SV_b8IWG1HQtBDqW8d University of Memphis Department of Social Work Catherine Clubb - Brown MSW Student/Newsletter Manager Dr. Susan Elswick Newsletter Coordinator/Editor be a stranger! April 2015 Please s end submissions to the Newsletter Coordinator/Editor: Dr. Susan Elswick Assistant Professor/Director of MSW Field Placement University of Memphis Department of Social Work 115 McCord Hall Memphis, TN 38152 selswick@memphis.edu 901 - 678 - 4722