http://www.memphis.edu/quaesitum/pdfs/2015articles/arellano2015.pdf
30David Arellano has been working in the Embedded Systems lab in the Electrical Engineering Department since Spring 2014 and plans on attend-ing graduate school after receiving a bachelors degree. He also plans to stay involved with the research community after graduation. With a pas -sion for travel, he hopes to see as much of the world as possible. Free time is spent studying theology, philosophy, and enjoying movies, music, art -ences in his life, and he owes all of his success to these blessings and the continuing support of loved ones. 31David ArellanoWireless Analog Passive Sensors for Small Bioelectric Signal Measurement Through Load Modulation Faculty SponsorDr. Bashir Morshed 32 33AbstractFully-passive wireless body-sensors open the possibility for unobtrusive physiological signal capture and monitoring in natural settings. While ca -pacitive analog passive wireless sensors have been developed, we present an alternative solution for signal capture based on load modulation using resistive transducers. The passive sensor is composed of a loop antenna, a tuning capacitor, and a resistive transducer suitable for the type of phys -iological signals to be measured. The interrogator transmits a carrier RF signal at 11.776MHz whose amplitude is modulated based on the resistive loading by the transducer. In this study, in place of a resistive transduc -er, an N-Channel Enhancement MOSFET is used to modulate the carrier signal with an applied small signal voltage. In previous studies, the sensor was characterized for various resistive loads of 1.2? to 82K? with an in-terrogator of low quality factor (QF). We demonstrate the effect of raising the QF of the interrogator, which increases sensitivity and allows for small signal voltage sensing at very low power levels (0dBm to +5dBm). The results demonstrate the viability of developing body-worn fully-passive sensors for small bioelectrical signal capture. 34Introduction The convenience and advantage of wireless sensing is undeniable. When monitoring multiple signals, wired sensors eventually become complex and unmanageable. However, traditional wireless sensors can themselves be ineffective due to restrictions such as battery power and size. A solution can be found in the battery-less nature of fully-passive sensors. Fully-passive sensors have already demonstrated the potential to be body-worn and unobtrusively collect physiological signals [1]-[3]. It is important at this point to distinguish the two different types of passive sensors. Passive sensors are commonly separated into two distinct catego-ries: wireless digital passive sensors (WDPS) and wireless analog passive sensors (WAPS). WDPS contain an ASIC chip that receives power from the scanner, turns on the circuitry, and wirelessly retransmits a digital by sampling the analog data with data acquisitions chips [4],[5]. WAPS, however, do not contain any digital ASIC chip, and can communicate via purely analog signals. WAPS have the advantages of simpler circuitry, lower cost, less complexity, extremely low power wireless transmission, and very fast response time. On the other hand, some disadvantages are higher numbers of artifacts and lower data quality and security than compared to WDPS. WAPS based on varactor and Surface Acoustic Wave (SAW) resonance have been successfully used for a multitude of remote signal capture applications [6],[7],[8],[9]. These WAPS use LC resonators, which utilize capacitive changes to modulate signals based on resonant frequency shifting [8],[9]. The SAW delay line is used for delayed back -scattered signal [7]. In this paper, we demonstrate the capture of small signal voltages using a novel WAPS system based on resistive load modulation (rWAPS). Our passive sensor is a parallel RLC resonator tank circuit with damping factor (QD) set by the load resistance. By using resistive transducers to capture physiological signals, the resistive load can be changed, which alters the damping factor (QD) and, in turn, amplitude modulates the carrier RF signal. This amplitude modulation can be captured by a signal analyzer with an envelope detection scheme. For this paper, in place of a resistive transducer, we have used a MOSFET to convert voltages to a 35resistive variation of RSD. In doing so, we demonstrate that body-worn passive sensors could allow for remote capture of bioelectrical signals such as those utilized in Electrocardiography (ECG), Electromyography (EMG), and Electroencephalography (EEG). These proposed rWAPS still maintain the advantages of simple construction and low component count. Ultimately, this makes the body-worn sensors extremely inexpensive to fabricate and even dispose of, once monitoring sessions have ended. Hardware Description For prototype development, three identical sized boards have been designed using the Cadence PSPICE tool (Cadence Design System, Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). Fig. 1 shows the schematic for the interrogator de-vice, and two different layouts for the rWAPS sensors. Fig. 1(b) shows the board, which implements a resistive transducer for signal sensing. Fig. 1(c) demonstrates a sensor board that was designed for a MOSFET in place of a transducer. The antenna design was inspired by similar designs from [10]. The interrogator board has two SMA con - nectors, one for the carrier input V1, which delivers carrier signals at 11.776MHz, and the other one for the signal analyzer. The capacitor C SS SP is used to adjust the resonant frequency of the circuit, with the loop antenna (LS) designed as a planar inductor. The terminal resistor (R SP) is used to raise Fig. 1 (a) Schematic of WAPS Interrogator (b) Schematic of transducer based sensor (c) Schematic of MOSFET based sensor 36the QF of the interrogator for maximum sensitivity. The passive sensor has a matching coil LI and a capacitor CI to tune the antenna for a matching resonant frequency. In Fig. 1(b) a resistive load R L is shown that rep-resents a resistive transducer. In Fig. 1(c) the MOSFET is used to convert input voltage (VS) to a correlated resistive variation of RSD. Another SMA connector is used on this board to deliver a noise reduced signal from the signal generator to the MOSFET via coaxial cable. Printed Circuit Boards (PCBs) were designed using Cadence Allegro SPB 16.6 (Cadence Design Systems Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). The sensor and interrogator boards are identical in size, measuring 6.89cm x 4.19cm. Fig. 2 shows the PCB layout of the three boards. Fig. 2 (Left) demonstrates the PCBs for both the interrogator device and resistive trans-ducer based sensor. These boards share identical circuitry, but are populat -ed differently, based on Fig. 1(a) and Fig. 1(b). Fig. 2 (Right) is the new PCB fabricated for the purpose of voltage sensing using a MOSFET. The PCBs were fabricated by Advanced Circuit (Aurora, CO, USA). Fig. 2 (Left) PCB layout of interrogator and transducer sensor (Right) PCB layout of MOSFET based sensor 37position.Method A Rigol DG4062 (Rigol Technologies Inc., Beijing, China) signal generator is used to capture the sensor characteristics in the Frequency Spectrum with the new high Q interrogator. A 0dBm signal is chirped from 9MHz to 14MHz. For signal modulation, a 10Hz signal is applied between the MOS-FET gate and source by the same signal generator producing the carrier frequency. The lower limit of the signal generator is only 2mV so a 20dB attenuator was used to achieve smaller voltages. The carrier frequency is set to 11.776MHz at +5dBm. This frequency and power level were chosen based on the data collected from the high QF interrogator characteristics. The MOSFET used is an Enhancement mode N-Channel MOSFET from Diodes Incorporated. The output is connected to a DSO-X 2024A (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) Oscilloscope. The oscilloscope is AC coupled with Peak Detect as the acquisition mode, and ASCII X-Y as the output -lyzed and plotted in Matlab. Fig. 3 Sensor Test Setup 38 The scanner and the passive sensor maintained a separation dis-(Fig. 3). Results Fig. 4 shows the sensor characteristics in the frequency spectrum using the high QF interrogator and the sensor board depicted in Fig. 1(b). It is important to note the modulation potential seen near 12.5MHz. The demonstrate a response sensitivity analogous to a 9.8x magnitude dif-ference. This is a considerable improvement from previous experiments, which demonstrated response sensitivities of 3x or less [11]. This increase in sensitivity is vital for detection of the small signals being sensed by the MOSFET. -nals corresponding to 1mV and 400µV input signals to the MOSFET (Vs) respectively. When a voltage is applied to the MOSFET between the gate resistive response of the MOSFET. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 show the modulated envelope of the 11.776MHz carrier signal captured by the interrogator. A 1mV sine wave modulation is clearly visible in Fig. 5. Additionally, the 400uV sine wave seen in Fig. 6 was found to be the lowest discernable signal achievable with our current set up.Fig. 4 Interrogator Frequency Characteristics RSP = 10k 39 Fig. 7 shows the voltage response of the rWAPS sensor, seen in Fig. 1c, with an enhancement type N-MOS. The region near the origin is Fig. 5 VS = 1mV Fig. 6 VS = 400uV 40curve found in the drain current response of a typical N-MOS transistor. Fig. 7 illustrates the response expected from our set up in this experiment. ohmic region described by typical MOSFET characteristic curves, and are using the MOSFET as a voltage controlled resistor. Conclusions In this paper, we have investigated a novel method for wireless small signal voltage sensing using purely passive components. By using a MOSFET without DC bias on our passive sensor to convert voltages into a respective resistance, we have demonstrated the ability to modulate an 11.766MHz carrier signal visible at the interrogator. Through experimen -tation we have shown that our wireless analog passive sensors have the ability to capture voltages as small as 400µV. Such sensitivity could allow for the rWAPS sensor to capture bioelectrical signals such as ECG and EMG that exist in the milli- and sub-millivolt range. Future research will attempt to improve coil design, and a wider variety of MOSFETs must be purpose of voltage controlled resistance. Fig. 7 Voltage response of WAPS Fig. 1c with an enhancement MOSFET along with second order polynomial trend lines 41References[1] Y.M. Chi, T. Jung, and G. Cauwenberghs, Dry-contact and noncontact biopotential electrodes: methodological review, IEEE Reviews in Biomed -ical Engineering, vol. 3, pp. 106-119, 2010. [2] A. Sabban, Comprehensive study of printed antennas on human body for medical applications, Intl. J. Advance in Medical Sci., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 1-10, 2013. [3] A. Dementyev, and J.R. Smith, A wearable UHF RFID-based EEG system, IEEE Int. Conf. RFID, pp. 1-7, 2013. [4] M. Sawan, Y. Hu, and J. Coulombe, Wireless smart implants dedicated to multichannel monitoring and microstimulation, IEEE Circuits and Sys-tems Magazine, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 21-39, 2005. [5] R. Bashirullah, Wireless implants, IEEE Microwave Magazine, pp. S14-S23, Dec. 2010. [6] Z. Popovic, E.A. Falkenstein, D. Costinett, and R. Zane, Low-power 6, pp. 1397-1409, 2013. [7] W. Luo, Q. Fu, J. Deng, G. Yan, D. Zhou, S. Gong, Y. Hu, An inte - grated passive impedance-loaded SAW sensor, Sensors and Actuators B: Chemical, vol. 187, pp. 215-220, 2013. [8] H.N. Schwerdt, Wencheng Xu, Shekhar, S., Abbaspour-Tamijani, A., Towe, B.C., Miranda, F.A., and Junseok Chae, A fully passive wireless microsystem for recording of neuropotentials using RF backscattering methods, J. Microelectromech Syst., vol. 20, no. 5, pp. 1119-1130, 2011. [9] J. Riistama, E. Aittokallio, J. Verho, and J. Lekkala, Totally passive wireless biopotential measurement sensor by utilizing inductively coupled resonance circuits, Sensors and Actuators A, vol. 157, pp. 313-321, 2010. [10] J.A. Goulbourne, HF Antenna Cookbook, Texas Inst., 2001. [11] S. Consul-Pacareu, D. Arellano, and B. I. Morshed, Body-worn ful - ly-passive wireless analog sensors for physiological signal capture through load modulation using resistive transducers, IEEE Healthcare Innovations and Point-of-Care Technologies Conf., (accepted), 2014.