http://www.memphis.edu/aa/resources/facres/tenurepromotion/docs/guidelines/art.pdf
TENURE AND PROMOTION GUIDELINES Department of Art Adopted 9 - 24 - 02 I. TENURE AND PROMOTION COMMITTEE PAGE A. PURPOSE 1 B. COMPOSITION 1 C. OFFICERS 1 D. SUBCOMMITTEES 1 1. THIRD - YEAR REVIEW 1 2. TENURE AND PROMOTION 2 3. PROMOTION TO FULL PROFESSOR 2 E. ACTIONS OF THE FULL COMMITTEE 3 II. ANNUAL REVIEW OF FACULTY A. PURPOSE 4 B. EVALUATION CRITERIA 4 C. PROCEDURES 4 D CALENDAR GUI DELINES 4 III. MID - TENURE REVIEW A. PURPOSE 5 B. EVALUATION CRITERIA 5 C. PROCEDURES 5 D. DOSSIER 6 E. CALENDAR GUIDELINES 7 IV. TENURE AND PROMOTION REVIEW A. PURPOSE 8 B. EVALUATION CRITERIA 10 C. PROCEDURES 10 D. DOSSIER 12 E. EXTERNAL PEER REVIEW 12 F. CALENDAR GUIDELINES 13 V. DEPARTMENT CRITERIA FOR EVALUATING CREATIVE 15 ACTIVITY, RESEARCH AND SCHOLARSHIP APPENDIX A: TENURE AND PROMOTI ON DOSSIER GUIDELINES AND FORMAT 24 APPENDIX B: FORM AND CONTENT OF APPOINTMENT HISTORY 25 APPENDIX C: EXTERNAL EVALUATOR LIST FORMAT 26 APPENDIX D: SAMPLE REQUEST LETTER FROM CHAIR 28 APPENDIX E : SIRS COURSE EVALUATION SUMMARY 29 T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 2 DEP ARTMENT OF ART TENURE AND PROMOTION GUIDELINES I. TENURE AND PROMOT ION COMMITTEE A. Purpose 1. Assists non - tenured faculty to prepare for mid - tenure review. 2. Makes recommendations regarding mid - tenure review and tenure and promotion applications. 3. Prepare s necessary reports to the department chair. 4. Revises tenure and promotion guidelines when necessary. B. Composition 1. Comprised of all tenured associate professors and professors. 2. For consideration of promotion to professor, the committee consists of t he subset of professors . C. Officers 1. The Tenure and Promotion Committee elects a professor as chair and a vice - chair to 2. Terms begin in January and last one year. 3. a. Scheduli ng and presiding over meetings. b. Assembling subcommittees. c. Recording votes and providing written documentation of the results of the D. Subcommittees 1. Third - year review a. Purpose: Mentors and assists the candidate in the preparation of a complete and representative dossier. b. Composition: specialization or in closely related fields. Each member of the subcommittee must be eligible to vote on the subcommittee chair, who shall be a person familiar to the extent possible with T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 3 Tenure and Prom otion Committee, in consultation with the department chair, shall select the remaining two members of the subcommittee. c. Actions: Conducts pre - promotion calendar Prepares written recom mendations and reports to the full tenure and promotion committee. 2. Tenure and promotion Sub - Committee a. Purpose: Evaluates dossier and prepares written recommendation for submission to the full Tenure and Promotion Committee regarding candidates. The sub committee ensures that the full Tenure and Promotion Committee has all of the data necessary to make an informed decision about the candidate. Members of the full committee are encouraged to ask questions about the dossier and to inform the subcommittee of any information or data they believe the candidate should address in the dossier. b. Composition: A minimum of three members chosen from committee members in the subc and/or promotion. The candidate selects the subcommittee chair, who shall be a area of specializatio n. The department tenure and promotion committee, in consultation with the department chair, shall select the remaining two members of the subcommittee. c. Actions: Assists with identifying external reviewers. Conducts the tenure and/or promot ion review, according to the Department Prepares written recommendations. Reports to the full Tenure and Promotion Committee. 3. Promotion to full professor a. Purpose: Evaluates dossier and prepares writt en recommendation for submission to the Tenure and Promotion Committee (comprised of Full professors only) regarding candidates. The subcommittee ensures that the full Tenure and Promotion Committee has all of the data necessary to make an informed decisio n about the candidate. Members of the full committee are encouraged to ask questions about the dossier and to inform the subcommittee of any information or data they believe the candidate should address in the dossier. Applicants for promotion to full prof essor have the option of requesting that the subcommittee assist in the preparation of their dossier and external peer reviewer list. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 4 b. Composition: closely related fiel ds selected from the full Tenure and Promotion Committee. The candidate selects a subcommittee chair, who should be a full professor and or her area of specialization. The department Tenure and Promotion Committee, in consultation with the department chair, shall select the remaining two members of the subcommittee. c. Actions: 1) Assists with identifying external reviewers 2) At the request of the candidate, conduct s the tenure and promotion review 3) Prepares written recommendations. 4) Reports to the full Tenure and Promotion Committee. E. Actions of the full committee 1. Elects officers annually. 2. Determines review needs. 3. Selects subcommittees in consultation with candidates and the department chair. 4. Acts on recommendations by subcommittees regarding external reviewers. 5. reco mmendations. Deliberations may require discussion and an interview with the candidate or others. 6. Votes on the applications. Those who vote on the recommendation must have fully 7. Prepares writ presented to the department chair. 8. 9. Considers the need to revise the guidelines for tenure and promotion within the Departm ent of Art at the request of any member of the committee at any time. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 5 II. ANNUAL REVIEW OF FACULTY A. Purpose 1. recommend improvement if necessary. 2. To serve as a basis for decisions relating to tenure, promotion recommendations, for salary increases and other personnel actions, including decisions regarding renewal of tenure - track appointments. B. Evaluation Criteria 1. Faculty are evaluated in terms of cri teria consistent with those of the university but tailored to disciplines in the Department of Art, which can be found in this document listed - Criteria for Creative Acti - 23). 2. Faculty shall be evaluated on the basis of teaching, advising, creative activity, research, scholarship, service, outreach and professionalism. Reappointment and promotion criteria recognize past acad emic performance and professional accomplishments. The achievement in each category. Consideration need not be limited to these criteria, nor should an individua l necessarily be expected to excel in all the criteria listed for each category. 3. Tenure track faculty are expected to show, on an annual basis, that they are making progress towards achieving standards set forth for receiving tenure. At a minimum, non te nure - track faculty are expected to demonstrate good performance of their responsibilities as a condition for reappointment. All faculty are expected to meet criteria related to professionalism. C. Procedures 1. The annual renewal of contract is conducted an nually by the department chair. 2. Procedures for annual review are those outlined in the U of M faculty handbook in the 3. When the potential for a recommendation of non - reappointment exists, the department chair seeks formal D. Calendar Guidelines Actions in the annual review process should occur no later than: March 1 - meet with chair to discuss evaluation. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 6 concerning recommendations of non - reappointment III. MID - TENURE REVIEW A. Purp ose 1. Evaluates untenured faculty in tenure - track positions about progress toward promotion and tenure. 2. Provides tenure - track faculty with the opportunity of a mentoring process in preparation for tenure and promotion. B. Evaluation Criteria 1. The evaluat ion criteria for the mid - tenure review should be the same as those used for promotion to associate professor with tenure. The university criteria relate to the 2. The candid ate should refer to Sec. IV B of this document (pp. 8 - 9) for the criteria in the categories of teaching, service, scholarship, creative activity, research, and professionalism. Section V of this document provides more detailed information about evaluation criteria for creative activity, research, and scholarship in the various disciplines of the Department of Art. 3. The candidate should have also demonstrated a willingness to work with colleagues in supporting the goals, missions, and the growth and developm ent of the department, college, and university. 4. The following considerations are also relevant to recommendations concerning tenure in the Department of Art: the candidate demonstrated a record of performance of needed department services and functions; constructiveness of the candidat department. C. Procedures 1. Credentials for candidates in the Department of Art are evaluated independently by the department Tenure and Promotion Committee and the chair. 2. The procedure for mid - tenure review should be the same as that used by the department for the sixth - year tenure and promotion review. 3. Deliberations and discussions of dossiers will take place only in committee meetings. Committee members must keep tenure and promotion deliberation s and discussions confidential . T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 7 4. emphasized that quality is more important than quantity . 5. The Mid - Tenure Review Subcommittee of the Tenure and promotion Committee prepares in instruction, scholarship, and outreach/service. The report should provide meaningful feedback and direction to the faculty member to assist in planning and organizing subsequent work activities. The subcommittee then submits this report and a written r ecommendation to the full Tenure and Promotion Committee. The full committee, having reviewed the necessary actions, and develops a final report with written recomme ndations to the department chair. 6. The chair will prepare a written report that addresses the strengths and weakness of the 7. A copy of the two reports will be presented to the faculty member. The Tenure and Promotion chair, subcommittee chair, and the department chair will meet with the candidate to discuss the reports and recommendations. 8. The candidate may write a brief statement in response to the discussion and reports obtained from the Tenure and Promotion Committee and the department chair. The purpose of this response is to allow the faculty member the opportunity to address any concerns or inaccuracies in the reports. The faculty member may also describe plans for a ddressing concerns raised during the mid - tenure review. In addition, the response ensures that all participants in the process understand the nature and context of the feedback, thereby minimizing miscommunication. 9. ions made by the department Tenure and Examples of scholarly and/or creativ e activities are not to be forwarded for review, but should be retained at the department so as to be available for the college and campus level reviews if requested. 10. The Dean shall prepare a written report and may meet with the candidate to discuss the results of the mid - tenure review . 11. Faculty whose pre - tenure materials are found deficient or incomplete in any way must reapply for review during the spring semester of their fourth year of employment. D. Dossier The dossier for the mid - tenure review sho uld be the same as the one for tenure and promotion, with the exception of letters from external peer reviewers, which are not required. The format and content of the University of Memphis Tenure and Promotion sample dossier (see Appendices A and B) should be used documenting evidence of T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 8 quality in instruction, scholarship (encompassing research and creative activity), and outreach/service. The inclusion of non - essential documents is discouraged. E. Calendar Guidelines 1. The mid - tenure review is conducted d uring the annual evaluation in the spring of the 2. Actions for the mid - tenure review process should occur no later than the dates listed below: a. In the second year of employment: cts a subcommittee chair. Tenure and Promotion Committee. b. In the third year of employment: Dossier is closed to additions. January 15 - n Subcommittee submits written recommendation to Tenure and Promotion Committee. f 2 reports to candidate. March 15 - Promotion Committee chair discuss with the candidate (during a specially - convened meeting during the period of the spring evaluation of the faculty) the findings of the third - year review. response (if any) to the Dean. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 9 IV. TENURE AND PROMO TION REVIEW A. Purpose To evaluate tenure track faculty for the purpose of tenure and promotion to associate and full professor. B. Evaluation Criteria Criteria for tenure and promotion in the Department of Art are consistent with those of the university but are tailored to disciplin es in the department. Faculty shall be evaluated on the basis of teaching; service; creative activity, research, and scholarship; and professionalism. Reappointment and promotion criteria recognize past academic performance and professional accomplishment s. The general criteria listed below are to be used as a guide in evaluating an criteria, nor should an individual necessarily be expected to excel in all the cr iteria listed for each category. Promotions are based on merit and are earned by high levels of achievement as evidenced by contributions to the overall missions of the individual discipline, programs, department, college, university, and the profession. For successively higher levels of faculty rank, higher levels of achievement should be expected. Tenure requires quality performance in those areas indicated as required for associate professor. Tenure track faculty are expected to show, on an annual basi s, that they are making progress towards achieving standards set forth for receiving tenure. 1. Teaching Achievement of criteria in this category will be verified through student evaluations, peer reviews, and other appropri ate means. Faculty are expected to: Assoc. Prof. a. Communicate effectively with students, colleagues and peers in profession. X X b. Develop and communicate education objectives clearly and effectively to students and department. X X c. Meet all student advising/mentoring responsibilities. X X d. Continually develop competencies in their subject area. X X e. Teach students to think purposely, creatively, critically and rigorously. X X f. Construct and use effect ive procedures to evaluate student performance. X X g. Promote and maintain rigorous academic standards. X X h. Synthesize insights to students beyond readily available information. X X i. Gain student respect, inspire confidence and enthusi asm. X X j. Demonstrate effective teaching. X X k. Take an active role in promoting educational programs in their discipline, department and college. X X l. Serve as source of specialized information and general knowledg e of the field. X X m. Take an active role in developing and evaluating their program curriculum. X X T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 10 X=Required D=Desired *=Aspire to 2. Service This category includes service to the individual discipline, department, coll ege, university, the profession, and society. Achievement of criteria in this category will be evidenced through a documented record. Faculty are expected to: Assoc. Prof. a. Mentor students effectively. X X b . Consistently participate in faculty governance. X X c. Actively participate in program, department, and university. X X d. Support and promote the program, department, and u niversity missions. X X e. Contribute to the community service mission of the program, department, and university. X X f. Serve on program, department, and university committees. X X profession. D D h. Demonstrate a consistent leadership role on committees, including being department committee chairs and serving on college and university committees. X X=Required D=Desired 3. Creative Activity, Research, Scholarship This category includes scholarship, research, professional work, and other creative endeavors related to the academic mission of the program, department, co llege, and/or university. Achievement of criteria in this category will be demonstrated through visible documentation or tangible results in creative activity, research, and scholarship recognized by peers outside the and may be in the form of publication, books, refereed and invited publications, awards, juried exhibitions, selection for paper presentation, invitational exhibitions, l ectures, and the like. The relative quality of this recognition should be demonstrated. Specific examples for each of the disciplines in the Department of Art are included in Section V. 4. Professionalism The candidate should demonstrate consi stency working cooperatively with colleagues in supporting the goals, missions, and the growth and development of the department, college, and university. The following considerations are relevant to recommendations concerning tenure in th growth and development of the department. Assoc. Prof. Faculty are expected to: a. Demonstrate those qualities of mind and spir it which merit emulation by the students and faculty: fairness, open - mindedness, objectivity, tolerance, patience, enthusiasm, and a fascination with and commitment to the field. X X T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 11 b. Contribute willingly to the activities of the academic un it and university. X X c. Exemplify a professional attitude. X X d. Demonstrate clearly that one can work well with colleagues and students. X X e. Maintain an active involvement in the programs of professional societies and and mee t necessary state certification requirements. X X f. Participate significantly in the professional work of the discipline in ways other than teaching and research. D X X=Required D=Desired C. Procedures 1. Creden tials for candidates in the Department of Art are evaluated independently by the department Tenure and Promotion Committee and the department chair. 2. The Tenure and Promotion Committee, composed of all associate and full professors in the department, elect s a chair who serves for one year. The chair is responsible for scheduling and presiding over meetings, assembling subcommittees, and recording votes department chai r. The vice - chair assists the chair and serves in her/his absence. It is the responsibility of all committee members to keep tenure and promotion deliberations and discussions confidential 3. A faculty member must submit a written application to the departme nt chair who in turn will inform the chair of the Tenure and Promotion Committee. Faculty members will be considered for tenure during the sixth consecutive year in a full - time faculty position unless otherwise contracted at the time of employment or unles s a written request with specific reasons for an extension of the tenure probationary period is submitted to the chair. ( See university policy for Extensions in the faculty handbook). The request for such an extension must be approved by the Dean, the Pro vost, and the President. A promotion whenever they meet the established criteria; they are strongly advised to confer with the department chair before submitting applicati ons for promotion. 4. Candidates prepare dossiers for review in consultation with the department chair. The format and the materials specified in the University of Memphis sample dossier (see Appendices A and B) are required. 5. Each candidate for tenure and p romotion to associate professor will be assisted in the preparation of a complete and representative dossier by a minimum three - member sub - committee, whose composition and function is detailed on page 2 above. (Candidates seeking promotion to full professo r have the option of requesting the assistance of such a subcommittee.) The major purpose of the subcommittee is to ensure that the full Tenure and Promotion Committee has all of the data necessary to make an informed decision about the candidate. Members of the full Tenure and Promotion Committee are encouraged to ask questions about the dossier and inform the subcommittee of any T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 12 information or data they believe the candidate should address in the dossier. The subcommittee works with the candidate to ident ify external reviewers and submit their suggestions to the full tenure and department committee, whose chair will consult with the department chair to determine the final list. 6. The subcommittee evaluates the dossier with respect to quality as well as qua ntity within quality is more important than quantity. 7. in particular, discusses accomplishments in instruction, scholarship, and outreach/service. The report should application meets the departm ent, college and university criteria for promotion and/or tenure. The subcommittee then submits this report and a written recommendation to the full Tenure and Promotion Committee 8. t meeting of the full department Tenure and Promotion Committee. The full department Tenure and on and an interview with the candidate or others. Those who vote on the recommendation must department Tenure and Promotion Committee determines, by a simply majority vote o f However, for promotion to professor, only the subcommittee of tenured professors will make the recommendations. Note: A member of the department Tenure and Promotion Committee, who is also a member of the college Tenure and Promotion Committee, may vote at the departmental level , but cannot vote at the college level . 9. depart ment chair. 10. and then, in cases involving promotion only, meets with the candidate to transmit the recommendations that the committee and the chair have made and reasons f or those recommendations. When the chair meets with the candidate being considered for tenure (and possibly also promotion), he/she should restrict his/her conversation to the recommendations that have been made, but should not at this time, address the re asons for the recommendations. 11. d by the department chair to the T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 13 college Tenure and Promotion Committee. Examples of scholarly and/or creative activities are not to be forwarded for review, but should be retained at the department so as to be available for the college and campus level re views, if requested. After its deliberations , the college committee sends the dossier and its recommendations to the Dean, who then sends the dossier and his/her recommendation to the Provost. 12. At any point in the evaluation process, the candidate may cho ose to withdraw his/her dossier for promotion from further consideration by writing a letter to the department chair, who will then inform the appropriate administrator and committee chairs. D. Dossier 1. Candidates prepare dossiers for review in consultati on with the department chair. The format and the materials specified in the University of Memphis sample dossier (see Appendices A and B) are required. The purpose of the dossier is to document evidence of quality in instruction, scholarship (encompassing research and creative activity), and outreach/service. The inclusion of non - essential documents is discouraged. 2. Each candidate for tenure and promotion to associate professor will be assisted in the preparation of a complete and representative dossier by a minimum three - member sub - 10 - 11). E. External Peer Review 1. Purpose: a. The purpose of external peer reviews is solely to provide an informed, objective evaluation of the quality of the scholarship, research or creative activity of the candidate. b. External reviewers will be selected from peer or comparable institutions with may be professionals with national recognition within the discipline. The external reviewers are expected to provide informed, objective evaluations rather than testimonials. Therefore, no more than one external reviewer can be a past mentor or collaborator. 2. Procedures: a. Cand idates must submit to his/her subcommittee a list of 4 - 8 potential external reviewers who are in a position to evaluate their work. The candidate will provide names, addresses, phone numbers, and e - mail addresses for each person on this list. The candidate may also submit a list (with justifications) of persons who may pose a conflict for consideration as reviewers. For each reviewer, the candidate should provide an accompanying brief paragraph identifying her/his credentials and a statement regarding the nature of the relationship to the candidate (if any). The candidate will also provide a description of any prior relationship with persons listed as reviewers. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 14 b. reviewers is acceptable (e.g., reviewers possess sufficient expertise, are nationally visible; no conflicts of interest exist). The subcommittee will identify The subcommittee will no t be constrained in this endeavor by the wishes of the candidate. c. The Department of Art chair and the chair of the Tenure and Promotion Committee will develop a list of outside peer reviews based upon the recommendation of the subcommittee. The chairs mus t select some of the names suggested by the candidate. The department is solely responsible for dossier should contain at least four external reviews. If it is not possible to o btain four reviews, the reasons must be documented at the departmental level. d. Peer reviewers who have agreed to write letters of evaluation regarding the sent the same materia l for evaluation, including: 1) 2) A letter from the chair to the reviewer, which includes a request for response e Appendix B). 3) A deadline for the written response. 4) A statement concerning the State of Tennessee Open Records Law document. NOTE: These are minimum requirements. Additional materi als related to research and creative activity may be necessary to enable the reviewer to assess the scholarship of the candidate in an objective fashion . F. Calendar Guidelines 1. Timetable for consideration for tenure and/or promotion: A faculty me mber must submit a written application to the chair (no later than January 31 preceding the year member wishes to be considered for tenure and/or promotion), who in turn will inform the chair of the Tenure and Promotion Committee. a. Tenure: Fac ulty members will be considered for tenure during the sixth consecutive year in a full - time faculty position unless otherwise contracted at the time of employment or unless a written request has been approved by the Dean and Provost. b. Promotion: Faculty m embers apply for promotion to associate and/or full professor whenever they meet the established criteria. Candidates are strongly advised to confer with the chair before submitting applications for promotion. 2. Model Calendar: Actions for tenure and promotion should occur no later than the dates listed below. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 15 In the 5 th year of appointment: February 1 Chair identifies candidates for tenure and promotion and informs the March 15 Candidate selects chair of subcommittee. March 30 Subcommittee formulated by the Art Department chair and the Tenure & Promotion Committee chair. Candidate submits list of external evaluators to subcommittee (Sect. IV E, pp . 1). April 15 the chair. Subcommittee, in consultation with the chair, selects a minimum of 4 peer reviewers and a list of approved alternates. This list (see Appendix B) is May 1 Department chair mails letters and candidate materials to external evaluators. August 15 September 15 First meeting of Tenure & Promotion Committee. September 15 - October 1 Review of dossier by all members of Tenure and Promotion Committee. October 1 Subcommittee recommendations presented to Tenure and Promotion Committee. Octo ber 21 Tenure and Promotion Committee chair submits Tenure and Promotion November 8 Art Department chair presents meets with candidate and reviews the two reports (Tenure and Pro candidate. Candidates for promotion may withdrawn his/her application from the review process at this time, if desired. November 30 on Committee December 7 Dean forwards dossier with recommendation to Provost and forwards copies of recommendation to Candidates. V. DEPARTMENT CRITER IA FOR EVALUATING CR EATIVE ACTIVITY, RESEARCH, AND SCHOLA RSHIP A. Architecture This category includes scholarship, research, professional work, and other creative endeavors related to the academic mission of the Architecture program, the Art Department, college, and university. Achievement of criteria in this category will be demonstrated through visible T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 16 documentation or tangible products, publications, reports, presentations, buildings, drawings, and accomplishments of outstanding quality and may be in the form of public ation, refereed publications, awards, juried exhibitions, selction for paper presentation, invitations for exhibitions, and invitations for lectures. The relative quality of recognition should be acknowledged. Criteria: Asst. Assoc. Full Faculty are expected to: Demonstrate evident engagement in creative X X X work/research, such as professional practice writing, research, exhibition, and design work. Demonstrate a capacity for independent thought X X X and intellectual curiosity. Exhibit creativity and quality in professional X X X work. Have developed and maintained an * X X understanding of a particular area of expertise. Architecture Criteria Continued Asst. Assoc. Full Faculty are expected to: Have exhibited the ability to solve abstract and * X X complex intellectual problems. Have made a practice of clear, thorough * X X documentation and presentation of work. Provide evidence of completed creative work/ * X X research of outstanding quality. Demonstrate a potential for continued creative/ * X X work research/scholarship of outstanding quality. Have achieved peer reocnition of completed * X X creative work/research beyond the univer sity. Have achieved a nationally recognized * * X scholarly or creative professionsal record. Consult his/her field, especially on D D D complex problems requiring depth of T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 17 perception, breadth of knowledge, sound pr ofessional judgment and creative solutions deserving of public and/or professional notice. Participate actively in the allied arts or D D D engage in the process of scientific discovery. Exhibit a history of distinguished professional * * X practice. Exhibit the ability to conduct rigourous research. * * D Analyze, and communicate results. Exhibit the ability to train students in research. * * D Enter design competitions. * * D X=required D=Desir ed *=Aspire to B. Art Education 1. Forms of Research and Creative Activity: a. Public exhibitions and projects in the studio practice. b. Commissioned projects in the studio practice. c. Research about the field of studio practice such as history, theory, critical issues, pedagogy, professional practices. d. Articles, books, curatorial work, educational exhibits, presentations or interactive media projects about studio practice. e. Current knowledge of disciplines, approaches, skills, technologies and equipmen t is precursory to the teaching and production of creative work. 2. Means of Dissemination and Recognition: a. Public exhibition of creative work in museums, galleries, alternative spaces, festivals and other appropriate venues as dedicated by the pro ject. b. Awards, grants, and honors from visual arts and design organizations. c. Critical review or publication of work in a visual art periodical, catalog or book. d. Inclusion or citation of work in anthologies, textbooks, articles, national presentation s or other compilations. e. Juried exhibitions. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 18 f. Invitational exhibitions. g. Conference presentations. h. Presentation and installation of work at conferences. i. On - line publication of work at curated sites. 3. Distinction Between Regional, National and Int ernational Recognition: Evaluative considerations are based on the visibility and quality of the activity and on the regional, national or international dissemination, and recognition of achievement as determined by 1) the status of the venue exhibiting t he work (regional, national or international); 2) the scope of the audience for the venue or publication; 3) the extent of the call for entries for a competition; 4) the qualifications of jurors and/or boards. 4. Preparation of Documentation: Projects shoul d be identified and described by title of work or description of exhibition, commissioning body, date of completion, materials or techniques employed, and the role of the individual in producing the work. C. Art History (Approved by the Art History Facul ty March 18, 2002) 1. Distinctions Between Regional, National, International: Art historians conduct research locally, nationally, and internationally, depending on their particular area of expertise. These geographical distinctions are useful in judgment o nly in recognizing that the access to a field of research centered abroad may be more difficult than access to a field closer to Memphis. The time and financial outlay involved in pursing such research is at times a factor in its achievement. The value of the research conducted, however, is not specifically determined by geographic distinctions. 2. Forms of Research Recognition: area of expertise. 3. Credentials a nd outside peer reviews: In many cases, the situations of scholar - experts in a given field are as diverse as their geographical locations. They are not all to be found in institutions with research reputations in other fields, so the value judgments of ou tside reviewing scholars should not be weighted unduly on current institutional affiliation. Current standing in the field, though more difficult to verify, offers a basis for clearer n does judgment of his/her current academic affiliation. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 19 candidate the field. 4. Forms of Research Communication: communicated in a form a ccessible to other scholars. This is done in a variety of contexts, which to some extent can be valued by their availability, scope, and longevity. Classification of Published Research in Art History: A single - authored book - length publication in essay form or a catalog raisonne that makes a serious contribution to art historical discourse, published by a major academic press with international distribution is the credential of highest value. The process used by major publishers to screen material for pu blication is most often sufficient to justify its relevance, quality, and wide distribution to committees evaluating materials for promotion. Careful research and distinguished scholarship is also fundamental to the publication of catalogues involving obj ects that were heretofore unknown or which have not received sufficient scholarly attention . Again, the importance of this information, once published, is to be assessed by the degree to which it is usefully incorporated into the body of knowledge availabl e to the field. The candidate must demonstrate the scope, availability and usefulness of this material to the wider academic community in order for committees to assess its value in the promotional process. The candidate must also specify the nature of the invitation to work on the catalog as well as the sponsorship and collaborative work of others. In an age when funding for research is often tied to public monies with educational goals, the research, time, and energy necessary to mount and document a maj or exhibition of art - historical significance must be considered a major undertaking. Again, such an achievement must be documented by the candidate in terms of availability, scope, and longevity. Not only the pre - exhibition process, but the educational imp act at the time of the showing, and the enduring scholarly value of catalogues and materials produced must be documented. Recognition of such achievements by grants, citations, and awards as well as by surveys of visitors, and venues that review and host t he exhibition are also of importance in these judgments. The candidate must attempt to put these elements into an understandable context for review committees. Collaborative work by others must be acknowledged and their contributions characterized, along w scholarly articles published in leading journals. Again the categories of availability, scope, and longevity can be used to assess the relative ranking of periodicals within the field of research. The candidate must demonstrate the purpose and relevance of these publications by characterizing their use and reception among other scholars. A bibliography of references to such articles is useful in this task. Faculty members, along with other scholars in the field, are at times invited to participate in wider academic publishing projects by writing encyclopedia or catalogue entries, contributing articles to specific vo lumes, or editing an anthology of materials on a given subject. Although these tasks all involve invitations to publish, they are not to be considered outside the general range of juried publications, since the invitation to participate is generally offere d only to those already recognized for the quality they would contribute to the enterprise. In each case, however, the candidate must characterize for the committee, the nature, scope, and longevity of the project as well as the part the candidate contribu ted to the whole. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 20 5. Other Forms of Communicating Scholarly Research Professional presentations in the context of national and international conferences as well as invitations to lecture in various contexts and on different occasions are another importa nt form of research communication. For each activity the candidate should offer timely characterization that would be helpful to evaluating committees: i.e., indicate focus of conference as it relates to the field of research, the nature of the session, w hether there is a published abstract, who attended and any resulting follow - up. 6. Further Indications of Recognition in the Field a. Professional service in national and international contexts can also be an indication of an as indicative of professional standing include but are not limited to the following situations in which the candidate is invited to: ield of expertise. Review manuscripts prior to publication by prominent periodical editors or book Serve as an officer in national and international professional organizations in the candida Organize conferences or chair sessions at professional meetings within the field. Serve as a reviewer of tenure and promotion candidates at outside institutions. s field of expertise. Serve on thesis or dissertation committees at outside institutions. b. Awards, grants, and honors are another indication of standing and reputation in the field. Although there are few awards established for art historians. Consequen tly when a book, exhibition, or article receives an award, it should be taken as a sign of high merit. There are also relatively few grants to which art historians have access for their projects or research. Therefore, a grant or fellowship awarded as the result of national or international competition is an indication that the granting agency considers the candidate entirely capable of performing the project outlined, a project which in itself is deemed worthy of funding When such an awarded grant is pres ented as evidence for promotion, however, the candidate must indicate the end - result of the project or publication for which the grant was awarded, how it was carried out, or to what end the funding was directed. D. Fine Arts (Photography) 1. Forms of Rese arch and Creative Activity: (includes but not limited to) Competitive, juried, or invitational exhibitions. Public or private commissions or acquisitions of work. Publication of visual art in books, magazines, and monographs. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 21 Publication of articles, chapters, or book - length publications about visual art. Conference presentations. Maintaining current knowledge of the field's technologies or theories. 2. Distinction Between Regional, National and International Recognition: Evaluation should consider th e visibility and quality of activity and the classification of regional, national or international dissemination and recognition determined by the following: 1) Status of the gallery or museum. 2) Extent of the call for entries for a competition or invitatio nal exhibition. 3) Status of the publication. 4) Audience for and distribution of the publication. 5) Status of the conference where a presentation is made . E. Fine Arts (Ceramics, Painting, Sculpture, Printmaking) 1. Forms of Research and Creative Activity: Public exhibitions and projects in the studio practice. Commissioned projects in the studio practice. Research about the field of studio practice such as history, theory, critical issues, pedagogy, professional practices. Articles, books, curatoria l work, educational exhibits, presentations or interactive media projects about studio practice. Current knowledge of disciplines, approaches, skills, technologies and equipment is precursory to the teaching and production of creative work. 2. Means of Dis semination and Recognition: 1) Public exhibition of creative work in museums, galleries, alternative spaces, festivals and other appropriate venues as dedicated by the project. 2) Awards, grants, and honors from visual arts and design organizations. 3) Cri tical review or publication of work in a visual art periodical, catalog or book. 4) Inclusion or citation of work in anthologies, textbooks, articles, national presentations or other compilations. 5) Juried exhibitions. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 22 6) Invitational exhibitions. 7) Confere nce presentations. 8) Presentation and installation of work at conferences. 9) On - line publication of work at curated sites. 3. Distinction Between Regional, National and International Recognition: Evaluative considerations are based on the visibility and q uality of the activity and on the regional, national or international dissemination and recognition of achievement as determined by 1) the status of the venue exhibiting the work (regional, national or international); 2) the scope of the audience for the v enue or publication; 3) the extent of the call for entries for a competition; 4) the qualifications of jurors and/or boards. 4. Preparation of Documentation: Projects should be identified and described by title of work or description of exhibition, commissi oning body, date of completion, materials or techniques employed, and the role of the individual in producing the work. F. Graphic Design 1. Forms of Research and Creative Activity: a. Professional practice and client - initiated projects in print or digital me dia. b. Self - authored projects in print or digital media. c. Research about the field of graphic design (history, theory, pedagogy, professional practices). d. Articles, books, curatorial work, educational exhibits, presentations or interactive media projects a bout graphic and communications design. e. Research and creative activity relating the teaching and practice of graphic design to studies in cognition and education, perceptual psychology, social and cultural studies, linguistics, communication, etc. f. Main taining current knowledge of technological equipment, skills, and communication issues is precursory to the teaching and production of creative work. 2. Means of Dissemination and Recognition : a. Publication of work in a graphic design periodical or book. b. Awa rds, grants, and honors from visual arts and design organizations. c. Inclusion or citation of work in anthologies, textbooks, articles, national presentations or other compilations. T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 23 d. Juried design exhibitions. e. Invited design exhibitions. f. Con ference presentations. g. Viewing and installations of work at conferences. h. On - line publication of work at curated sites. 3. Distinction Between Regional, National and International Recognition: Evaluation should consider the visibility and quality o f dissemination and the classification of regional, national or international dissemination and recognition determined by 1) the status of the client commissioning work (regional, national or international distribution of product or service); 2) the scope of the audience for the publication; 3) the extent of the call for entries for a competition. 4. Preparation of Documentation: Projects should be identified and described by title of work or description of assignment, client, date of completion, technological format, and the role of the individual in producing the work. For time - based works, the designer should provide detailed information on how to view and move through the work, cue points, and length of segment to be viewed. G. Interior Desi gn (Draft approved by Interior Design Faculty, February 22, 2002) This category includes scholarship, research, professional work, and other creative endeavors that relate to the academic mission of the Interior Design program, Department of Art and univ ersity. Achievement of criteria in this category will be demonstrated through visible documentation of tangible results: publications, reports, presentations, drawings, or interiors. Documentation will be recognized by peers and may be in the form of publication, refereed publications, awards juried exhibitions, selection for paper presentation, invitations for exhibitions, or invited lectures. Exampl es of interior design creative activity, research and scholarship include but are not limited to the following: paper and poster presentation to related professional organization, publication of produced interior, publication of research, research publish ed on related professional organization internet www. site, continuing education units presented to related professional organizations, presentation of interiors to related professional organization, presentations for interior television network, etc. ASST. ASSOC. PROF. Criteria: Faculty are expected to: Demonstrate evident engagement in creative work/research, X X X such as scholarship, creative activity, professional T - P Title Page 9 - 24 - 02 24 development, prof essional practice, writing, research, exhibition, theoretical design Exhibit creativity and quality in professional work X X X Make a practice of clear, thorough documentation and presentation of work * X X Provide evidence of completed creative work/research * x x of quality Demonstrate a potential for continued quality in creative * X X work/research/scholarship Develop a focus in an area of research and or creative * X X activity on a regional level Develop and maintain an understanding of a particular area of expertise on a national and/ or international level * * X Exhibit a history of distinguished scholarship, creative activity, and professional practice * * X Hold educational qualifications terminal degree X X X or its equivalent X=Required D=Desired *Aspired